.. include:: <isonum.txt>

***********
Description
***********

.. Copied from product page (http://www.ti.com/tool/launchxl-cc26x2r1)

The |DEVICE| devices are part of the SimpleLink |trade| microcontroller (MCU)
platform which consists of Wi-F\ |reg|, Bluetooth\ |reg| low energy, Sub-1 GHz,
Thread, zigbee, 802.15.4 and host MCUs, which all share a common, easy-to-use
development environment with a single core software development kit (SDK) and
rich tool set. A one-time integration of the SimpleLink platform enables you to
add any combination of the portfolio's devices into your design, allowing 100
percent code reuse when your design requirements change. For more information,
visit www.ti.com/simplelink. This LaunchPad kit supports programming and
debugging from Code Composer Studio\ |trade| and IAR Embedded Workbench\ |reg|
integrated development environments (IDEs).

EnergyTrace\ |trade| technology for the |DEVICE| is an energy-based code
analysis tool that measures and displays the application's energy profile and
helps to optimize it for ultra-low-power consumption.

Thread
======

With the |DEVICE| SDK you can kick start your development of Thread-based
application for the |DEVICE| wireless MCU. The SimpleLink |DEVICE| SDK includes
tools, application examples, documentation and source code of the Thread 1.1
networking protocol based on openthread (github.com/openthread/openthread), an
open-source implementation of the Thread networking stack. Example applications
such as a door lock, window shades, thermostat and temperature sensor
applications, based on Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) running atop of
the Thread networking stack are released to kick-start the SW design of end
equipment sets. Additionally, the SimpleLink |DEVICE| SDK includes a Command-Line
Interface (CLI) application and a Network Co-Processor (NCP) implementation,
which can be used in combination with a host Thread border-router agent
software as a whole Thread border router reference solution
(https://github.com/openthread/borderrouter).

Zigbee
======

The SimpleLink |DEVICE| SDK supports a Zigbee solution, delivered as plugin,
which runs on the SimpleLink MCU framework (TI-RTOS, CCS / CCS Cloud). The
Zigbee plugin contains everything needed for a Zigbee compliant solution,
including tools, application examples, documentation, and source code. It also
includes a Zigbee Pro compliant Zigbee stack, as well as Green Power (GP)
device and sink support. Example applications include door lock, light, switch,
temperature sensor and thermostat. Sample applications are zigbee
certification-ready.

The Zigbee plugin also includes support for Zigbee Network Processor
configuration, which can be used in two chip architectures where the host
implements the Cluster Library and the Zigbee applications.

TI 15.4-Stack
=============

TI 15.4-Stack is part of the |SDK|. TI 15.4-Stack is a software stack from
Texas Instruments that implements the standard IEEE 802.15.4e and 802.15.4g
specification. The |SDK| also provides the required tools, real-time operating
system (:term:`RTOS`), and example applications for TI 15.4-Stack to help
developers quickly get started developing their own star-topology based
wireless network products. The purpose of this document is to give an overview
of TI 15.4-Stack to help developers run the out-of- box example applications
and enable creation of custom TI 15.4-Stack based wireless star-topology
networking solutions. This document introduces the essential need-to-know
technology details for developing a wireless network based on the IEEE 802.15.4
specification supported by TI 15.4-Stack.
