.. _sec-beacon-mode:

Beacon Enabled Mode
===================

Introduction
------------

The :term:`IEEE` 802.15.4 specification defines beacon-enabled mode of
operation where the personal area network (:term:`PAN`) coordinator device
transmits periodic beacons to indicate its presence and allows other devices to
perform PAN discovery and synchronization. The beacons provide beacon-related
information and also mark the start of the new super-frame. The beacon has
information on the super-frame specification, which helps the device intending
to join the network to synchronize timing and network related parameters before
starting the join process. The beacon helps the existing device in the PAN to
maintain the network synchronization. The super-frame is divided into an active
and an inactive period. During the active period, devices communicate using the
:term:`CSMA/CA` procedure except in 863MHz band where :term:`LBT` is used for
channel access. The inactive period allows the devices in the network to
conserve energy.

Network Operations
------------------

This section describes critical network operations for the beacon-enabled mode of operation.

Network Start-Up
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A network is always started by a fully functional device after performing a MAC
sublayer reset. The network operates on a single channel (frequency hopping is
not available in this configuration, although frequency agility may be
implemented by application-specific means). To select the most optimal channel
of operation, the fully functional device (before starting the network) can
optionally scan for the channels with the least amount of radio interference by
first performing the energy-detect scan to identify the list of channels with
the least amount of :term:`RF` energy. When a list of channels is identified,
the fully functional device can (optionally) perform active scan to find the
channel with the least number of active networks. When the channel with the
least RF energy and lowest number of active networks is selected, the PAN
coordinator must set its short address (the PAN identifier) beacon payload and
turn on the associate permit flag. The network starts upon the following
actions:

-   Call to ``ApiMac_mlmeStartReq()`` API

    +   With the PAN coordinator parameter set to *TRUE*

    +   With the desired super-frame configuration

    +   Coordinator realignment parameter set to *FALSE*

:numref:`fig-beacon-mode-network-start-up-sequence` shows the interaction
between the application and |TIMAC| to start the beacon-enabled network by
the PAN coordinator.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-network-start-up-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-network-start-up-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Network Start-Up Sequence

Network Association
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A device that is intended to join the beacon-enabled network must first perform
a passive channel scan. The results of the channel scan can then be used to
choose a suitable network. Following the selection of an association network,
the application should set the following :term:`PIB` items:

-   ``ApiMac_attribute_beaconOrder``

    +   Set to the value received in the beacon super-frame specification of
        the chosen PAN

-   ``ApiMac_attribute_superframeOrder``

    +   Set to the value received in the beacon super-frame specification of
        the chosen PAN

-   ``ApiMac_attribute_panId``

    +   PAN identifier of the PAN

-   ``ApiMac_attribute_coordShortAddress``

    +   Short address of the PAN coordinator

The next step is to perform beacon synchronization to track the beacon and to
detect any pending messages. Synchronization is requested by using the
``ApiMac_mlmeSyncReq()`` API call and setting the following parameters:

-   Channel
-   PHY identifier
-   Channel page
-   Setting track beacon to TRUE

To acquire beacon synchronization, the device searches for the maximum time calculated as follows:

    :math:`aBaseSuperframeDuration* (2n + 1), where n is the value of the beacon order`

and

    :math:`aBaseSuperframeDuration = aBaseSlotDuration Ã— aNumSuperframeSlots = 60*16 = 960 symbols`

Refer to the IEEE 802.15.4 specification for the definition of previous constants.

The device must to wait for the previously stated time period for the
synchronization process to complete. Alternatively the device can turn off the
Auto Request by setting the ``ApiMac_attribute_autoRequest`` attribute item to
FALSE, which forces the MAC sublayer to send the beacon notification to the
upper layer. If the application receives beacon notification indications for
the normal beacon and no sync loss indication, it is a good indication that the
device has synchronized with the coordinator beacons. TI recommends waiting for
at least two beacon notifications before turning on the Auto Request.

When the device is synchronized to the network and is tracking the beacon, the
application can perform the network association. The
``ApiMac_mlmeAssociateReq()`` API call is used to send the association request
message to the coordinator. The association process is successful when the
application receives the association confirmation.

:numref:`fig-beacon-mode-associate-sequence` shows a device performing the
network association.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-associate-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-associate-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Device Association Sequence

Data Exchange
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The sequence diagram in :numref:`fig-beacon-mode-direct-data-sequence` depicts
the various direct data transactions between an always-on (mains powered)
device and a coordinator in a beacon-enabled network.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-direct-data-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-direct-data-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Direct Data Exchange Sequence

The sequence diagram in :numref:`fig-beacon-mode-indirect-data-sequence`
depicts the indirect data transaction in a beacon-enabled network.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-indirect-data-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-indirect-data-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Indirect Data Exchange Sequence

Maintaining a Connection for End Nodes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All devices operating on a beacon-enabled PAN must acquire beacon
synchronization with a coordinator. Synchronization is performed by receiving
and decoding the beacon frame information. The beacon frame contains the super-
frame specification which lets the device sync its timing information with the
coordinator and detect any pending messages.

During the network association phase, the end device calls the
``ApiMac_mlmeSyncReq()`` API with the ``trackBeacon`` parameter set to TRUE to
acquire beacon and keep track of it (see :numref:`fig-beacon-mode-sync-loss-sequence`
). With the track beacon set to TRUE, the MAC sublayer shall enable
its receiver at a time before the next expected beacon frame transmission. If
the number of consecutive beacons missed by the MAC sub layer reaches the
maximum allowed (four beacons), the TI 15.4-Stack makes a callback
``ApiMac_syncLossIndFp_t()`` with a status of ``ApiMac_status_beaconLoss`` to
the application. The application tries to resynchronize with the coordinator by
calling ``ApiMac_mlmeSyncReq()`` with ``trackBeacon`` set to TRUE.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-sync-loss-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-sync-loss-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Sync Loss Sequence

Network Disassociation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section describes three scenarios. The first two scenarios are initiated
by the coordinator (one for the mains powered end device and the other for the
battery powered end device). In the third scenario, the end device
disassociates itself from the network.

When the coordinator application requires an associated device to leave the
network, the coordinator application requests that TI 15.4-Stack sends a
disassociation notification command by using the
``ApiMac_mlmeDisassociateReq()`` call. If the ``txIndirect`` parameter is set
to TRUE, the TI 15.4-Stack sends the disassociation notification command to the
device using indirect transmission; then, the disassociation notification
command is added to the list of pending transactions stored on the coordinator
and pulled by the device using a data request command (see
:numref:`fig-beacon-mode-indirect-disassociation-sequence`).

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-indirect-disassociation-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-indirect-disassociation-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Coordinator Initiated Indirect Disassociation Sequence

If the ``txIndirect`` parameter is set to FALSE, TI 15.4-Stack sends the
disassociation notification command frame to the device using direct
transmission (see :numref:`fig-beacon-mode-direct-disassociation-sequence`).
The TI 15.4-Stack layer at the coordinator makes a callback to the application
using the registered function pointer of type ``ApiMac_disassociateCnfFp_t``
after completion of the disassociation. TI 15.4-Stack at the end-device makes a
callback to the application using the registered function pointer of type
``ApiMac_disassociateIndFp_t`` on reception of the disassociation notification
command frame from the coordinator.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-direct-disassociation-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-direct-disassociation-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Coordinator-Initiated Direct Disassociation Sequence

The end-device application can also initiate the disassociation process as
described in :numref:`fig-beacon-mode-device-disassociation-sequence`.

.. figure:: resources/fig-beacon-mode-device-disassociation-sequence.png
    :name: fig-beacon-mode-device-disassociation-sequence
    :align: center

    Beacon Mode Device-Initiated Disassociation Sequence

Stack Configuration Knobs
-------------------------

Attribute Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:numref:`tab-beacon-mode-configuration` lists the attribute configuration for
beacon mode.

.. _tab-beacon-mode-configuration:
.. table:: Attribute Configuration for Beacon Mode

    +----------------------------------+----------+-------------+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | **Name**                         | **Type** | **Range**   | **API Number** | **Description**                                                                                  |
    +==================================+==========+=============+================+==================================================================================================+
    | ApiMac_attribute_associatePermit | bool     | TRUE, FALSE | 0x41           | TRUE if a coordinator is currently allowing association                                          |
    +----------------------------------+----------+-------------+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | ApiMac_attribute_autoRequest     | bool     | TRUE, FALSE | 0x42           | TRUE if a device automatically sends a data request if its address is listed in the beacon frame |
    +----------------------------------+----------+-------------+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | ApiMac_attribute_beaconOrder     | uint8    | 0â€“15        | 0x47           | How often the coordinator transmits a beacon                                                     |
    +----------------------------------+----------+-------------+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | ApiMac_attribute_RxOnWhenIdle    | bool     | TRUE, FALSE | 0x52           | TRUE if the MAC enables its receiver during idle periods                                         |
    +----------------------------------+----------+-------------+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | ApiMac_attribute_superframeOrder | uint8    | 0â€“15        | 0x54           | This specifies the length of the active portion of the superframe.                               |
    +----------------------------------+----------+-------------+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

The ``ApiMac_attribute_associatePermit`` is used by the coordinator application
to indicate to the joining devices whether it allows association or not.
Setting this attribute item to TRUE by the coordinator indicates to the joining
devices in its beacon frame that the coordinator application allows
association.

The ``ApiMac_attribute_RxOnWhenIdle``, if set to TRUE, enables the receiver
during the idle period.

The ``ApiMac_attribute_RxOnWhenIdle``, if set to TRUE, enables the receiver
during the idle in the contention period of the super-frame. The coordinator
application sets this item to TRUE.

The ``ApiMac_attribute_beaconOrder`` item is used by the device application to
set the beacon order during the joining phase, after the passive scan of
beacons, and after the device makes the decision on which coordinator to join.
This attribute shall be set to the selected coordinators beacon order value.

The ``ApiMac_attribute_superframeOrder`` item is used by the device application
to set the super-frame order during the joining phase, after the passive scan
of beacons, and after the device makes the decision on which coordinator to
join. This attribute shall be set to the selected coordinators beacon order
value.

Configuration Constants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TI 15.4-Stack uses a structure containing various user-configurable parameters
(at compile time). This structure, called ``macCfg_t``, is in the ``mac_cfg.c``
file. :numref:`tab-beacon-config-constants` describes the configuration
elements.

.. _tab-beacon-config-constants:
.. table:: Configuration Constants

    +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+-------------+
    | **Name**        | **Description**                                                                                                                                              | **Range**     | **Default** |
    +=================+==============================================================================================================================================================+===============+=============+
    | txDataMax       | Maximum number of data frames queued in the transmit data queue.                                                                                             | 1â€“255         | 2           |
    +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+-------------+
    | txMax           | Maximum number of frames of all types queued in the transmit data queue.                                                                                     | 1â€“255         | 5           |
    +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+-------------+
    | rxMax           | Maximum number of frames queued in the receive data queue.                                                                                                   | 1â€“255         | 2           |
    +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+-------------+
    | dataIndOffset   | Allocate additional bytes in the data indication for application-defined headers.                                                                            | 0â€“127         | 0           |
    +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+-------------+
    | appPendingQueue | When TRUE, registered callback of type ApiMac_pollIndFp_t will be made to the application when a data request command frame is received from another device. | TRUE or FALSE | FALSE       |
    +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------+-------------+